Introduce Valkey Over RDMA protocol (#123)
valkey-io/valkey-doc: topics/RDMA.md

---
title: "RDMA support"
linkTitle: "RDMA support"

> weight: 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This is not used. We'll delete this field in all pages.

description: Valkey Over RDMA support

> aliases: [
>     /topics/RDMA,
>     /docs/manual/RDMA,
>     /docs/manual/RDMA.md
> ]

Reviewer: This is just left-overs from redis docs, because they renamed the pages many times and these were used for creating redirects. We don't need that.

```suggestion
```

---

Valkey supports the RDMA connection type as a module that requires compilation
as a shared library and dynamic loading on demand.

## Protocol

Note that the protocol part defines the QP type RC (like TCP),
communication commands, and payload exchange mechanism.

> This dependency is based solely on the RDMA (aka Infiniband) specification

Reviewer: Add Inifinband to the wordlist file to prevent spellcheck error.

and is independent of both software (including the OS and user libraries)
and hardware (including vendors and low-level transports).

The Valkey Over RDMA protocol separates into control-plane

> (to exchange control message) and data-plane(to transfer the real payload for Valkey).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(to exchange control message) and data-plane (to transfer the real payload for Valkey).
```

### Control message

For control message, use a fixed 32 bytes message which defines structures:

> ```

Reviewer: This enables syntax highlighting as C code.

````suggestion
```C
````

typedef struct ValkeyRdmaFeature {
    /* defined as following Opcodes */
    uint16_t opcode;
    /* select features */
    uint16_t select;
    uint8_t rsvd[20];
    /* feature bits */
    uint64_t features;
} ValkeyRdmaFeature;

typedef struct ValkeyRdmaKeepalive {
    /* defined as following Opcodes */
    uint16_t opcode;
    uint8_t rsvd[30];
} ValkeyRdmaKeepalive;

typedef struct ValkeyRdmaMemory {
    /* defined as following Opcodes */
    uint16_t opcode;
    uint8_t rsvd[14];
    /* address of a transfer buffer which is used to receive remote streaming data,
     * aka 'RX buffer address'. The remote side should use this as 'TX buffer address' */
    uint64_t addr;
    /* length of the 'RX buffer' */
    uint32_t length;
    /* the RDMA remote key of 'RX buffer' */
    uint32_t key;
} ValkeyRdmaMemory;

typedef union ValkeyRdmaCmd {
    ValkeyRdmaFeature feature;
    ValkeyRdmaKeepalive keepalive;
    ValkeyRdmaMemory memory;
} ValkeyRdmaCmd;
```

### Opcodes
|Command| Value | Description |
| :----: | :----: | :----: |

> | GetServerFeature   | 0 | required, get the features offered by Valkey server |
> | SetClientFeature   | 1 | required, negotiate features and set it to Valkey server |
> | Keepalive          | 2 | required, detect unexpected orphan connection |
> | RegisterXferMemory | 3 | required, tell the 'RX transfer buffer' information to the remote side, and the remote side uses this as 'TX transfer buffer' |

Reviewer: Use backticks around command names to avoid spellcheck errors.

```suggestion
| `GetServerFeature`   | 0 | required, get the features offered by Valkey server |
| `SetClientFeature`   | 1 | required, negotiate features and set it to Valkey server |
| `Keepalive`          | 2 | required, detect unexpected orphan connection |
| `RegisterXferMemory` | 3 | required, tell the 'RX transfer buffer' information to the remote side, and the remote side uses this as 'TX transfer buffer' |
```

### Operations of RDMA
- To send a control message by RDMA '**ibv_post_send**' with opcode '**IBV_WR_SEND**' with structure
  'ValkeyRdmaCmd'.
- To receive a control message by RDMA '**ibv_post_recv**', and the received buffer
  size should be size of 'ValkeyRdmaCmd'.
- To transfer stream data by RDMA '**ibv_post_send**' with opcode '**IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE**'(optional) and
  '**IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM**'(required), to write data segments into a connection by
  RDMA [WRITE][WRITE][WRITE]...[WRITE WITH IMM], the length of total buffer is described by

>   immediate data(unsigned int 32).

Reviewer: Use backticks for these names to mark it as code and to avoid spellcheck errors.

It's OK to use ``**`ibv_post_send`**`` if you want extra highlight. Otherwise just `` `ValkeyRdmaCmd` ``, etc.

                <- Valkey response [@IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM] ---
                                  .......
                -- Valkey commands [@IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM] -->
                <- Valkey response [@IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM] ---
                                  .......

RX is full
                ----- Register transfer memory [@IBV_WR_SEND] ----->
                                                                    [@ibv_post_recv]
                                                                    setup TX buffer
                <- Valkey response [@IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM] ---
                                  .......

                                                                    RX is full
                <---- Register transfer memory [@IBV_WR_SEND] ------
[@ibv_post_recv]
setup TX buffer
                -- Valkey commands [@IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM] -->
                <- Valkey response [@IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM] ---
                                  .......

                -------------------RDMA disconnect----------------->
                <------------------RDMA disconnect------------------
```

> ## Getting Started
> ---------------

Reviewer: For a level 2 heading, use one of `##` or `--------`, not both.

```suggestion
## Getting Started

```

Btw, isn't it better to but "Getting started" first and "Protocol" below?

Note that Valkey Over RDMA is only supported by Linux currently.

## Running manually

To manually run a Valkey server with RDMA mode:

    ./src/valkey-server --protected-mode no \
         --loadmodule src/valkey-rdma.so bind=192.168.122.100 port=6379

It's possible to change bind address/port of RDMA by runtime command:

    192.168.122.100:6379> CONFIG SET rdma-port 6380

It's also possible to have both RDMA and TCP available, and there is no

> conflict of TCP(6379) and RDMA(6379), Ex:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
conflict of TCP (6379) and RDMA (6379). Example:
```

---
title: "RDMA support"
linkTitle: "RDMA support"
description: Valkey Over RDMA support
---

Valkey supports the Remote Direct Memory Access (RDMA) connection type via a
Valkey module that can be dynamically loaded on demand.

## Getting Started

RDMA enables direct data exchange between networked computers' main memory,

> bypassing processors and operating systems.

Reviewer 2: Can we add more of an introduce to what RDMA is here? This document heavily assumes you know what RDMA is, I would like our documentation to include a better explanation if someone were to find this and is curious about it. Trying to act as someone who doesn't know, I imagine questions like, "How does Valkey use RDMA?" "What type of support do I need for it?" "Is it encrypted?" "How does it work" etc. Worst case, maybe just include a link up here about where to learn more.

Author: Because I defined the specification and implemented the `Valkey Over RDMA`, I unconsciously believe that others also understand this. Thanks for pointing out these, `How does Valkey Over RDMA work` and `Is Valkey Over RDMA encrypted` will be added in the next version.

As a result, RDMA offers better performance compared to TCP. Test results indicate that
Valkey Over RDMA achieves approximately 2 times higher QPS and lower latency.

Please note that Valkey Over RDMA is currently supported only on Linux.

## Running manually

To run a Valkey server with RDMA mode:

    ./src/valkey-server --protected-mode no \
         --loadmodule src/valkey-rdma.so bind=192.168.122.100 port=6379

Bind address/port of RDMA can be modified at runtime using the following command:

    192.168.122.100:6379> CONFIG SET rdma-port 6380

Valkey can run both RDMA and TCP concurrently on the same port:

    ./src/valkey-server --protected-mode no \
         --loadmodule src/valkey-rdma.so bind=192.168.122.100 port=6379 \
         --port 6379

Note that the network interface (192.168.122.100 of this example) should support
RDMA. To test a server supports RDMA or not:

    ~# rdma dev show (a new version iproute2 package)
Or:

    ~# ibv_devices (ibverbs-utils package of Debian/Ubuntu)

> ## Protocol

Reviewer 2: I found this section really confusing, and had to read through it a couple of times to really understand what it was trying to say. If the intention is for a client to implement the protocol, it seems like they need a good bit of understanding about RDMA to do so. If we're just trying to give an overview, I wonder how much is useful here vs just keeping it in .c file.

Like, a concrete point is what is the point of the 4 new opcodes we are introducing. Are they part of the RDMA spec or are they something special we are adding. Since this topic should stand on it's own for people who are finding it on the website or man page, I think it needs to make it clearer what its purpose is.

Reviewer 3: >If the intention is for a client to implement the protocol

That is a good point. I was under the impression that this is meant to be an "introduction" that shows the high level idea without getting into too much low level detail. But going through @madolson's comments, I realize that there is a lot more value in defining a real RFC spec that can be used to guide the client implementation than a high level overview. We should pivot.

Author: I'm trying to say:
* the Valkey Over RDMA protocol(`Protocol` section). Base on this specification, we can implement both the server side, and the client sides in different programming language. Just like `valkey-doc-pizhenwei/topics/protocol.md`
* how to run Valkey Over RDMA(`Getting Started`).

Do you prefer to separate this doc into two? or any suggestions?

Reviewer 4: Viewing this as a specification that can be implemented by a client, it seems that it would be useful to include a link to the code for any client(s) that already exist.  Perhaps one could be given the status of "reference implementation".

> The protocol defines the QP type RC (like TCP), communication commands, and payload exchange mechanism.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The protocol defines the Queue Pairs (QP) type reliable connection, like TCP, communication commands, and payload exchange mechanism.
```

> This dependency is based solely on the RDMA (aka Infiniband) specification

Reviewer 2: What dependency are you referring to here?

Author: Like TCP/IP, Valkey defines `RESP protocol` over TCP/IP, but not dependent on Network interface vendor.

I want to say: Valkey Over RDMA depends on RDMA only, but not any low level transport or vendor.
Please help me to make this easy to understand...

and is independent of both software (including the OS and user libraries)
and hardware (including vendors and low-level transports).

> Valkey Over RDMA has control-plane (control messages) and data-plane (payload transfer).

Reviewer 2: This reference to control plane and dataplane confused me because this isn't exactly how network routers normally use the term control plane. I'm used to it referring to to refer to determining how packets are routed, but the discussion here seems to be about the handshake. I would drop the sentence, but if others found it useful I'm okay with it.

### Control message

Control messages use fixed 32-byte big-endian message structures:
```C
typedef struct ValkeyRdmaFeature {
    /* defined as following Opcodes */
    uint16_t opcode;
    /* select features */
    uint16_t select;
    uint8_t rsvd[20];
    /* feature bits */
    uint64_t features;
} ValkeyRdmaFeature;

typedef struct ValkeyRdmaKeepalive {
    /* defined as following Opcodes */
    uint16_t opcode;
    uint8_t rsvd[30];
} ValkeyRdmaKeepalive;

typedef struct ValkeyRdmaMemory {
    /* defined as following Opcodes */
    uint16_t opcode;

>     uint8_t rsvd[14];

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    uint8_t reserved[14];
```
I didn't realize this was reserved until I read the spec.

    /* address of a transfer buffer which is used to receive remote streaming data,
     * aka 'RX buffer address'. The remote side should use this as 'TX buffer address' */
    uint64_t addr;
    /* length of the 'RX buffer' */
    uint32_t length;
    /* the RDMA remote key of 'RX buffer' */
    uint32_t key;
} ValkeyRdmaMemory;

typedef union ValkeyRdmaCmd {
    ValkeyRdmaFeature feature;
    ValkeyRdmaKeepalive keepalive;
    ValkeyRdmaMemory memory;
} ValkeyRdmaCmd;
```

### Opcodes
|Command| Value | Description |
| :----: | :----: | :----: |

> | `GetServerFeature`   | 0 | required, get the features offered by Valkey server |

Reviewer 2: What does required mean in this context? All of the opcodes are apparently required. There are also op codes mentioned later, are they same or different opcodes?

Author: Yes, the whole commands are required in the current document. As time goes on, more features may be introduced into the specification, then client&server use `GetServerFeature` and `SetClientFeature` to negotiate features. The negotiatable features are optional.

A typical usage in the future, VALKEY_RDMA_FEATURE_FOO and `ValkeyRdmaFoo` are defined:
* an old client connects a new server, detect `VALKEY_RDMA_FEATURE_FOO` but not use.
* a new client connects a new server, detect `VALKEY_RDMA_FEATURE_FOO` and use `ValkeyRdmaFoo` command
* a new client connects a old server, no `VALKEY_RDMA_FEATURE_FOO` detected, not use `ValkeyRdmaFoo`

Then we can have an extensible specification, and avoid unrecognized commands for both client and server.

| `SetClientFeature`   | 1 | required, negotiate features and set it to Valkey server |
| `Keepalive`          | 2 | required, detect unexpected orphan connection |
| `RegisterXferMemory` | 3 | required, tell the 'RX transfer buffer' information to the remote side, and the remote side uses this as 'TX transfer buffer' |

### RDMA Operations
- Send a control message by RDMA '**`ibv_post_send`**' with opcode '**`IBV_WR_SEND`**' with structure
  'ValkeyRdmaCmd'.
- Receive a control message by RDMA '**`ibv_post_recv`**', and the received buffer
  size should be size of 'ValkeyRdmaCmd'.

> - Transfer stream data by RDMA '**`ibv_post_send`**' with opcode '**`IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE`**' (optional) and

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by '**`IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE`**'  being optional? Is there a specific time that it's optional?

Author: For example, a server wants to write iovec[3] of 128, 256, 128 bytes:
* 1, 'IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE' 128 bytes, 'IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE' 256 bytes, 'IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM' 128 bytes and IMMDT is 512, this means: write 512 bytes to the remote side. the remote side is awakened only one time.
* 2, IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM' 128 bytes and IMMDT is 128, 'IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM' 256 bytes and IMMDT is 256, 'IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM' 128 bytes and IMMDT is 128. this means: write 512 bytes to the remote side. the remote side is awakened 3 times.

The two version write the same 512 bytes to the remote side, but 1 has better performance(more complicated to implement).

  '**`IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM`**' (required), to write data segments into a connection by
  RDMA [WRITE][WRITE][WRITE]...[WRITE WITH IMM], the length of total buffer is described by
  immediate data (unsigned int 32).

### Maximum WQEs of RDMA
o specific limit, 1024 recommended for WQEs. Recommended WQEs is 1024.

> Flow control for WQE MAY be defined/implemented in the future.

Reviewer 2: We say 1024 is recommended twice, but I don't know what this is or why it matters. Do we need this sentence? Would someone implementing a client know what to do with this?

Author: What about `No specific limit, 1024 recommended for WQEs. Flow control for WQE MAY be defined/implemented in the future.`

For RDMA, before receiving any message, the QP must prepare the receive buffer by `ibv_post_recv`, otherwise the incoming message can't find any available WQE of receive queue, then error occurs.

When Valkey client gets connected, `command` and `info` commands will trigger lots of message returned, to avoid no enough WQEs issue, 1024 is recommended.

---
title: "RDMA support"
linkTitle: "RDMA support"
description: Valkey Over RDMA support
---

> Valkey supports the RDMA connection type as a module that requires compilation
> as a shared library and dynamic loading on demand.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Valkey supports the Remote Direct Memory Access (RDMA) connection type via a Valkey module that can be dynamically loaded on demand.
```

## Getting Started

> RDMA stands for Remote Direct Memory Access. It is a technology that allows computers in
> a network to exchange data directly in the main memory, bypassing the involvement of processors,
> caches, or operating systems on either computer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
RDMA enables direct data exchange between networked computers' main memory, bypassing processors and operating systems.
```

As a result, RDMA offers better performance compared to TCP. Test results indicate that
Valkey Over RDMA achieves approximately 2 times higher QPS and lower latency.

Please note that Valkey Over RDMA is currently supported only on Linux.

## Running manually

> To manually run a Valkey server with RDMA mode:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To run a Valkey server with RDMA mode:
```

    ./src/valkey-server --protected-mode no \
         --loadmodule src/valkey-rdma.so bind=192.168.122.100 port=6379

> It's possible to change bind address/port of RDMA by runtime command:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
RDMA's bind address/port can be modified at runtime using the following command:
```

Author: Use `Bind address/port of RDMA can be modified at runtime using the following command:` instead to avoid `RDMA's` spellcheck error.

    192.168.122.100:6379> CONFIG SET rdma-port 6380

> It's also possible to have both RDMA and TCP available, and there is no
> conflict of TCP (6379) and RDMA (6379). Example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Valkey can run both RDMA and TCP concurrently on the same port:
```

    ./src/valkey-server --protected-mode no \
         --loadmodule src/valkey-rdma.so bind=192.168.122.100 port=6379 \
         --port 6379

Note that the network interface (192.168.122.100 of this example) should support
RDMA. To test a server supports RDMA or not:

    ~# rdma dev show (a new version iproute2 package)
Or:

    ~# ibv_devices (ibverbs-utils package of Debian/Ubuntu)

## Protocol

> Note that the protocol part defines the QP type RC (like TCP),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The protocol defines the QP type RC (like TCP),
```

communication commands, and payload exchange mechanism.
This dependency is based solely on the RDMA (aka Infiniband) specification
and is independent of both software (including the OS and user libraries)
and hardware (including vendors and low-level transports).

> The Valkey Over RDMA protocol separates into control-plane
> (to exchange control message) and data-plane (to transfer the real payload for Valkey).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Valkey Over RDMA has control-plane (control messages) and data-plane (payload transfer).
```

### Control message

> For control message, use a fixed 32 bytes message in big-endian which defines structures:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Control messages use fixed 32-byte big-endian message structures:
```

    /* defined as following Opcodes */
    uint16_t opcode;
    uint8_t rsvd[30];
} ValkeyRdmaKeepalive;

typedef struct ValkeyRdmaMemory {
    /* defined as following Opcodes */
    uint16_t opcode;
    uint8_t rsvd[14];
    /* address of a transfer buffer which is used to receive remote streaming data,
     * aka 'RX buffer address'. The remote side should use this as 'TX buffer address' */
    uint64_t addr;
    /* length of the 'RX buffer' */
    uint32_t length;
    /* the RDMA remote key of 'RX buffer' */
    uint32_t key;
} ValkeyRdmaMemory;

typedef union ValkeyRdmaCmd {
    ValkeyRdmaFeature feature;
    ValkeyRdmaKeepalive keepalive;
    ValkeyRdmaMemory memory;
} ValkeyRdmaCmd;
```

### Opcodes
|Command| Value | Description |
| :----: | :----: | :----: |
| `GetServerFeature`   | 0 | required, get the features offered by Valkey server |
| `SetClientFeature`   | 1 | required, negotiate features and set it to Valkey server |
| `Keepalive`          | 2 | required, detect unexpected orphan connection |
| `RegisterXferMemory` | 3 | required, tell the 'RX transfer buffer' information to the remote side, and the remote side uses this as 'TX transfer buffer' |

> ### Operations of RDMA

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### RDMA Operations
```

> - To send a control message by RDMA '**`ibv_post_send`**' with opcode '**`IBV_WR_SEND`**' with structure

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Send a control message by RDMA '**`ibv_post_send`**' with opcode '**`IBV_WR_SEND`**' with structure
```

  'ValkeyRdmaCmd'.

> - To receive a control message by RDMA '**`ibv_post_recv`**', and the received buffer

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Receive a control message by RDMA '**`ibv_post_recv`**', and the received buffer
```

  size should be size of 'ValkeyRdmaCmd'.

> - To transfer stream data by RDMA '**`ibv_post_send`**' with opcode '**`IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE`**' (optional) and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Transfer stream data by RDMA '**`ibv_post_send`**' with opcode '**`IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE`**' (optional) and
```

  '**`IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM`**' (required), to write data segments into a connection by
  RDMA [WRITE][WRITE][WRITE]...[WRITE WITH IMM], the length of total buffer is described by
  immediate data (unsigned int 32).

### Maximum WQEs of RDMA

> Currently no specific restriction is defined in this protocol. Recommended WQEs is 1024.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
No specific limit, 1024 recommended for WQEs.
```

                                  .......
                -- Valkey commands [@IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM] -->
                <- Valkey response [@IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM] ---
                                  .......

RX is full
                ----- Register transfer memory [@IBV_WR_SEND] ----->
                                                                    [@ibv_post_recv]
                                                                    setup TX buffer
                <- Valkey response [@IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM] ---
                                  .......

                                                                    RX is full
                <---- Register transfer memory [@IBV_WR_SEND] ------
[@ibv_post_recv]
setup TX buffer
                -- Valkey commands [@IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM] -->
                <- Valkey response [@IBV_WR_RDMA_WRITE_WITH_IMM] ---
                                  .......

                -------------------RDMA disconnect----------------->
                <------------------RDMA disconnect------------------
```

The Valkey Over RDMA protocol is designed to efficiently transfer stream data and

> bears similarities to several mechanisms introduced in academic papers, albeit with some differences:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
bears similarities to several mechanisms introduced in academic papers with some modifications:
```

---
title: "RDMA support"
linkTitle: "RDMA support"
description: Valkey Over RDMA support
---

Valkey supports the Remote Direct Memory Access (RDMA) connection type via a
Valkey module that can be dynamically loaded on demand.

> 

Reviewer 4: I suggest adding a new "Limitations" section.  It could include things like
- only on Linux
- not compatible with replication
- active connections limited by RDMA network card, unlikely to reach 10,000

Author: Sound good! Fix later. Thanks for all your suggestion!

> ## Getting Started

Reviewer 4: There is no mention of the special make that is required to generate the `valkey-rdma.so`.  Is that covered somewhere else?  If so, a link to that would help a sys-admin that is trying to get started.

Author: > There is no mention of the special make that is required to generate the `valkey-rdma.so`. Is that covered somewhere else? If so, a link to that would help a sys-admin that is trying to get started.
> 

Yes, this part is in valkey/README.md. Because the code is not merged into valkey source now, I think I can put the link after code gets merged.

> Are kernel mods still required? Does the sys-admin need to install any thing like libraries or the service? If so, this seems like the best place to say so.
> 

I guess setup RDMA env (both hardware and software) is not part of this document, before using RDMA, a user should know if there is any.

BTW, I also notice libibverbs and librdmacm are auto installed by some Linux OS.

> There are some hints in this direction in the "How does Valkey use RDMA" section. Perhaps they should be moved to "getting started" and be spelt out in detail.

Reviewer 4: > > Are kernel mods still required? Does the sys-admin need to install any thing like libraries or the service? If so, this seems like the best place to say so.
> 
> I guess setup RDMA env (both hardware and software) is not part of this document, before using RDMA, a user should know if there is any.
> 
> BTW, I also notice libibverbs and librdmacm are auto installed by some Linux OS.

This document doesn't even hint at the prerequisites for Valkey Over RDMA.  Yes, someone that already knows about RDMA will be fine.  However, someone that does not already know about RDMA could come to this document and say "Hey, this looks cool, 2.5 times faster, why doesn't everyone use it?  Let's try it out."  At the very least, I think it would be polite to provide such a person a hint that they will need special hardware and software set up, and where to learn more.  I looked at the link to the Wikipeadia page that you included and was surprised that it never once stated that you need a special kind of network card.

Maybe just "Before using Valkey over RDMA, you must understand how to configure RDMA on your host and client machines."

[RDMA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_direct_memory_access)
enables direct data exchange between networked computers' main memory,
bypassing processors and operating systems.

As a result, RDMA offers better performance compared to TCP/IP. Test results indicate that
Valkey Over RDMA achieves approximately 2 times higher QPS and lower latency.

Please note that Valkey Over RDMA is currently supported only on Linux.

> ## Running manually

Reviewer 4: Is there a non-manual way to run it?  If so, how?

Author: Sure, add valkey.conf sample in next version.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps "Running Manually" should be "Specifying RDMA on the Valkey command line".

---
title: "RDMA support"
linkTitle: "RDMA support"
description: Valkey Over RDMA support
---

Valkey supports the Remote Direct Memory Access (RDMA) connection type via a
Valkey module that can be dynamically loaded on demand.

## Getting Started

[RDMA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_direct_memory_access)
enables direct data exchange between networked computers' main memory,
bypassing processors and operating systems.

As a result, RDMA offers better performance compared to TCP/IP. Test results indicate that
Valkey Over RDMA achieves approximately 2 times higher QPS and lower latency.

Please note that Valkey Over RDMA is currently supported only on Linux.

## Running manually

To run a Valkey server with RDMA mode:

>     ~# ./src/valkey-server --protected-mode no \

Reviewer 4: I presume `~# ` is the value of PS1 for your shell.  Perhaps it should be removed here and below.

Author: > I presume `~# ` is the value of PS1 for your shell. Perhaps it should be removed here and below.

I notice `./valkey-server --port 6380 --replicaof 127.0.0.1 6379` in `topics/valkey.conf.md`, so you are right. thanks!

         --loadmodule src/valkey-rdma.so bind=192.168.122.100 port=6379

Bind address/port of RDMA can be modified at runtime using the following command:

    192.168.122.100:6379> CONFIG SET rdma-port 6380

Valkey can run both RDMA and TCP/IP concurrently on the same port:

    ~# ./src/valkey-server --protected-mode no \
         --loadmodule src/valkey-rdma.so bind=192.168.122.100 port=6379 \
         --port 6379

Or append `loadmodule src/valkey-rdma.so bind=192.168.122.100 port=6379` in valkey.conf, then:

    ~# ./src/valkey-server valkey.conf

> Note that the network interface (192.168.122.100 of this example) should support

Reviewer 4: I just noticed this.  It is a helpful hint to a naive user.  Perhaps there should be a "Prerequisites" or "Dependencies" section.

---
title: "RDMA support"
linkTitle: "RDMA support"
description: Valkey Over RDMA support
---

> Valkey supports the Remote Direct Memory Access (RDMA) connection type via a

Reviewer: experimental support

We should add a note that it can break at any minor version, lole we wrote in the README in the code repo.

Author: > experimental support
> 
OK.

> We should add a note that it can break at any minor version, like we wrote in the README in the code repo.

Please take a look at `Limitations` section, there is a note `Valkey Over RDMA is experimental, it may be changed or be removed in any minor or major version.`.
Should I describe it at other place?

Reviewer: OK, I didn't see this before. Limitations section is good.

Author: > OK, I didn't see this before. Limitations section is good.

Hope this doesn't let you feel pushy...
I guess we need merge it for Valkey 8.0.

Reviewer: We don't have versioned docs. They are mainly online. The docs are not included in any release, though distros may generate man pages from them when packaging Valkey 8. We can merge it just before Valkey 8. Thus, no panic.
